---
layout: single
title: "On working remotely"
categories: code
---

I've spent the majority of 2013 working and traveling.

I do Rails programming at [General Assembly](https://generalassemb.ly/), a New York City based successful
startup. Most of the team work full time on site, and remote team (which grows
since I started) typically share the same working hours, although we are not
required to do so.

Sometimes it's really useful to work out of sync, when we want to develop
something on our own, or tackle other chores like refactors, or reading or
writing content; tasks that require brain power and is better not to be
distracted while on them. Other times it's better to intersect
timetables, communication being the canonical example but also for holding
discussions on different ways of solving a problem, double checking a problem
you see is actually a problem waiting to be solved, prioritizing, pair
programming, etc. Having the flexibility to choose when to do your work is
empowering, and requires a good deal of responsibility.

We do daily standups, where we talk about the short term tasks and ask for help
if we need. We do retrospective meetings every other week, where we describe how
the previous iteration went (good and bad things, facts, anonymus raw feelings),
and also what would each one of us like to accomplish for the next iteration
(mid-term vision). You can talk and add commitments as much or little as you
want, they are typically relaxed and fun, almost all of us participate a lot,
and I feel of it as a time window where I can communicate almost as if I were on
site.

Team is generally aware of remote coworkers, but I can see how it can get
frustrating if they aren't. If the camera points to the roof, or the volume of
your remote voice is not at the same level as in the office, you may feel like
Bender when his body is stolen by Richard Nixon in Futurama, and Fry clumsily
tries to point his head to Nixon while he reclaims it (please!) back. Not nice to
interrupt whoever is speaking to make them aware of these issues either, so we
are rather comfy because remotes are given as much attention as we can with our
tooling.

We use Google Hangouts, we do pair programming, we use chat rooms, emoticons and
GitHub, but you are not _there_. Most of the time we remote guys can't really
follow the jokes that arise at standup, for example, as we don't share all the
context and you just don't hear as well. There is a gap, but very few times did
it lead to mistakes work wise (building the wrong feature, or building it
twice). Root cause of those mistakes weren't the distance or our tools though,
but miscommunications we could have avoided. So I consider communication as a
problem to be aware of, and to take care of, but not as a big productivity
hindrance. Recently online cameras where installed at the office. I personally
don't use them, but some remote coworkers are happy they can now know who's away
from keyboard, when they are all out for lunch, or who can poke the person who's
right now AFK.

I personally miss the physical office many times. I can chat with people at
office spaces wherever I am, or whenever I share my workplace with other
programmer friends who live nearby, but you develop a relationship with your
coworkers, and you lose daily life camaraderie (let's go to that hackathon, or
conference, or happy hour, or to the park for a run, etc). In New York many
times do they share lunch time, or a dinner party when a remote worker visits,
and so on. It's obvious you can't have everything, I repeat it anyway because it
seems like travelling and working is the perfect dream (hell it is!), but it's
not for free.

I spent the previous weeks traveling through Germany. One challenge I faced is,
if I move across cities every week, I can't work that well (not a good room to
work on, can't find wi-fi password, physically tired, friendly people around
wanting to chat, etc). So I'm now settling down for longer in cities I love.
(BTW, it's _so_ hard to find nice cities in Germany and nearby countries!) A
second challenge is time zone difference, which grew 5 hours from Buenos Aires,
so now I'm six hours ahead of NYC. We agree that four hours of intersection with
EST at least is best, and I personally tried to work more (aware of the
productivity loss mentioned before) but then again, if at 7pm we are on the peak
of the work day and your friend brings his after-office good german beers... You
are in some great trouble! On timezones I'm anyway a night owl so I just start
and finish late in the day. On beers, I'll accept them if I'm ending the work
day. It's not that hard, I can say now before lunch.

I started this trip prepared for not being understood when I explain I'm
actually working (and on a late timetable) and not on vacations. I wasn't
prepared for the tax of moving accross cities and houses, and it was also rather
easy to get around it. Houses are typically cheaper if you rent them by the week
or month.

I'm aware of how these sound like first world problems. They still are problems
if you want to travel and work productively in challenging projects.

Overall, core values at work seem to be responsibility, freedom, and trust.
"Let's sync up on what's valuable for the company, and work in building as good
as we can, and better". If we remotes are not driven, a little ambitious, and
very organized, it wouldn't work for them. If I needed to work on site for most
of the year, had to ask for permission to schedule a visit to the doctor, or
couldn't hold discussions on which workflows seem better for our problems, it
wouldn't work that well for me.

Boils down to the problem of freedom: no need to enforce rules or
flows on trustworthy people. I strived for, and now truly enjoy such an
environment. A "Leffe Blond" to celebrate it! Ohh, not quite yet.

[Related WideTeams interview](http://www.wideteams.com/2013/08/14/episode-93-tute-costa-of-general-assembly/)
